NixOS configuration - testing, debugging, and organization (#274)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/nixos-configuration-testing.md

(integration-testing-vms)=

# NixOS Configuration testing

Draft 2022.08.11

## What will you learn?

This guide introduces the functionality of Nix Package Manager to write automated tests to debug NixOS configurations independent of a working NixOS installation.

## What do you need?
<!-- todo links -->

- Basic knowledge of the Nix language.
- A working installation of Nix Package Manager or NixOS.
- nixpkgs path set in `$NIX_PATH`
- NixOS configuration in vm tutorial

## Automated testing of a NixOS configuration

> Nixpkgs provide a [test environment](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-nixos-tests) to automate testing of NixOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NixOS provides a [test environment](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-nixos-tests) to automate integration testing.
```

> The function `nixosTest` can be used to build and run one or more virtual machines and automatically starts a script written in Python to test the NixOS configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `nixosTest` can be used to build and run one or more virtual machines. The test framework automatically starts a Python script to test the NixOS configuration.

```

It takes one attribute set as its argument.
The attribute set has two attributes `nodes` and `testScript`.
The attribute nodes contains a set of named configurations.

> This is the case because test scripts can involve more than one virtual machine.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the manual section instead, and if you want to go into detail on the interface, add it as an explanation to the example.

### minimal example

> A minimal test that can be run on the default configuration is to check if the user `root` and `alice` have access to firefox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a minimal test on the default configuration, we will check if the user `root` and `alice` can run Firefox.
```

> Because in our example we only use one virtual machine we simply call it `machine` and place it inside the nodes attribute set.

Reviewer: This is a bit surprising. I would like to see an introduction to what a test *is* in this framework (a derivation, it seems?), and at least a note that we're writing the test setup first and then feed it the machine configuration and the test script later.

> ```nix
> let
>   nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
>   pkgs = import nixpkgs {};
> in
>   pkgs.nixosTest {
>     nodes.machine = { config, pkgs, ... }: {
>       ...
>     }
>   }
> ```
> <!-- does it make sense to have a un-compilable section? -->

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```nix
let
  nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
  pkgs = import nixpkgs {};
in
  pkgs.nixosTest {
    nodes.machine = { config, pkgs, ... }: {
      # ...
    }
  }
```
````

The test script looks like this:

> ```nix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

machine.wait_for_unit("default.target")
machine.succeed("su -- alice -c 'which firefox'")
machine.fail("su -- root -c 'which firefox'")
```

> The python script is referring to the `machine` attribute we used to name the configuration in the `nodes` attribute.

Reviewer: It may be worthwhile to note that the names are taken from the Nix expression and accessible in the Python script.

The script waits until start up is reaching systemd `default.target`.
We are using the `su` command to switch between users and the `which` command to see if the user has access to `firefox`.

> We expect that the command `which firefox` to succeed for user `alice` and to fail for `root`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect that the command `which firefox` to succeed for user `alice` and to fail for `root`.

```

> This script is put into a function inside the `testScript` attribute.

Reviewer: It would be good to note why it takes `nodes`, or maybe that can be covered [above](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/274/files#r964173183) or referred to the above.

> Unlike the virtual machine before we don't need to specify a password, the test script has super user rights in the virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the virtual machine before, we don't need to specify a password.
The test script has super user rights in the virtual machine.
```

The complete `minimaltest.nix` file content looks like the following:
```{code-block}
let
  nixpkgs = <nixpkgs>;
  pkgs = import nixpkgs {};
in
  pkgs.nixosTest {
    nodes.machine = { config, pkgs, ... }: {
      boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
      boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = true;

      services.xserver.enable = true;
      services.xserver.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
      services.xserver.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;

      users.users.alice = {
        isNormalUser = true;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
        packages = with pkgs; [
          firefox
          thunderbird
        ];
      };

      system.stateVersion = "22.05";

>     };

Reviewer: Both for clarity and practical code organization it seems obvious to `import` that original `configuration.nix`. Is there a reason you did not do it that way?

    testScript = {nodes, ...}: ''
      machine.wait_for_unit("default.target")
      machine.succeed("su -- alice -c 'which firefox'")
      machine.fail("su -- root -c 'which firefox'")
    '';
  }
```

### Running tests

To set up all machines and execute the test script:[^nixdev]

```shell-session
$ nix-build minimaltest.nix
```

> You'll notice an error message if something goes wrong.[^nixdev]

Reviewer: Just [make sure the example works](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#ensure-that-the-tutorial-works-reliably).

> In case the tests succeed, you should see at the end:[^nixdev]

Reviewer: Do the footnotes have a purpose here?

```shell-session
...
test script finished in 10.96s
cleaning up
killing machine (pid 10)
(0.00 seconds)
/nix/store/bx7z3imvxxpwkkza10vb23czhw7873w2-vm-test-run-unnamed

> ```

Reviewer: I would recommend doing [this pattern](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/267/files#diff-c08ceee24137f72990af94b2e6a5eb487ec1ec767437a6082ba06d9d4244b835R94-R103) for shell input/output. It's both "semantically" readable in source and can be [highlighted with CSS to distinguish input and output.](https://github.com/NixOS/nixos-summer/pull/42) @sbruder maybe you could also add that for nix.dev?

> ### interactive python shell to interact with virtual machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using a Python shell to interact with virtual machine
```

> When developing tests or when something breaks, it’s useful to interactively fiddle with the script or access a terminal for a machine.[^nixdev]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing tests or when something breaks, it’s useful to interactively tinker with the test or access a terminal for a machine.[^nixdev]
```

> To interactively start a Python session with a testing framework:[^nixdev]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start an interactive Python session in the test framework:[^nixdev]
```

```shell-session
$ $(nix-build -A driverInteractive minimaltest.nix)/bin/nixos-test-driver
```

> You can run any of the testing operations. The testScript attribute from our minimaltest.nix definition can be executed with `test_script()` function.[^nixdev]

Reviewer: Please clarify "testing operations". Do you mean the calls in the example?
```suggestion
You can run any of the testing operations. The `testScript` attribute from our `minimaltest.nix` definition can be executed with `test_script()` function.[^nixdev]
```

> Within this Python shell you can enter a interactive shell you can run python commands like those in the test script.

Reviewer: This sentence seems broken?

> On the first evaluation of the command the virtual machine is started.

Reviewer: Evaluation of the NixOS test driver? Which command? Use active voice: "the virtual machine starts"

> You can manually trigger the start of the virtual machine by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start a virtual machine with
```

[Use imperative for instructions.](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/blob/d32652b94fcc1ed4336f3a8ebf7fc5678b48c1eb/CONTRIBUTING.md?plain=1#L8)

```shell-session
>>> machine.start()
```

> for a specific node.
> 
> or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for a specific node (in this case `machine`), or
```

```shell-session
>>> start_all()
```
for all specified nodes.

> You can enter a interactive shell on the virtual machine using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enter a interactive shell on the virtual machine:
```

```shell-session
>>> machine.shell_interact()
```

and run commandline commands like:

> ```shell-session
> $ uname -a
> Linux server 5.10.37 #1-NixOS SMP Fri May 14 07:50:46 UTC 2021 x86_64 GNU/Linux
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```shell-session
uname -a
```

    Linux server 5.10.37 #1-NixOS SMP Fri May 14 07:50:46 UTC 2021 x86_64 GNU/Linux
````

> The nixos manual contains a [reference for commands](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#ssec-machine-objects) to design tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NixOS manual contains a [reference for commands](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#ssec-machine-objects) to design tests.
```

> ### rerun successful tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Re-run successful tests
```

> Because test results are stored in the nix-store a successful test is cached, this means that nix will not run the test a second time as long as the test setup (configuration or test script) is not changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because test results are kept in the Nix store, a successful test is cached.
This means that Nix will not run the test a second time as long as the test setup (machine configuration or test script) stays the same.
```
It may be worthwhile to note that this is true as long as there is no *semantic* change, as a refactoring of the system definition may still produce the exact same configuration.

@Radvendii you might be interested to link your upcoming post here.

> To run a test again one needs to remove the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, to run a test again, one needs to remove the result.

```

> If you would try to delete the result using the symbolic link you will get the following error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would try to delete the result using the symbolic link, you will get the following error:

```

> ```shell-session
> $ nix-store --delete ./result
> finding garbage collector roots...
> 0 store paths deleted, 0.00 MiB freed
> error: Cannot delete path '/nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed' since it is still alive. To find out why, use: nix-store --query --roots
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```shell-session
nix-store --delete ./result
```

    finding garbage collector roots...
    0 store paths deleted, 0.00 MiB freed
    error: Cannot delete path '/nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed' since it is still alive. To find out why, use: nix-store --query --roots
````

> you need to remove the symbolic link and only than you can remove the cached result:
> ```shell-session
> $ rm ./result
> ```
> 
> now you are able to remove the cached result in the nix store directly
> ```shell-session
> $ nix-store --delete /nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Instead, remove the symbolic link and only then remove the cached result:
```shell-session
rm ./result
nix-store --delete /nix/store/4klj06bsilkqkn6h2sia8dcsi72wbcfl-vm-test-run-unnamed
```

This can be also done with one command:

```shell-session
result=$(readlink -f ./result) rm ./result && nix-store --delete $result
```
````

### wayland application example (todo remove home-manager)

The configuration we are using is starting the gnome desktop manager using wayland.
To test if a wayland application is working is more complicated because we need to automate the login into gnome and automated startup of the application. Additionally we need to enable access to gnome dbus interface. To do this we need to modify the configuration

 the automated start of the application including automated login to gnome/wayland

In the machine configuration we need to enable autologin for the user alice.

```nix
      services.xserver.displayManager.autoLogin.enable = true;
      services.xserver.displayManager.autoLogin.user = "alice";
```

> To simplify our script we pin the uid of the user to 1000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simplify our test script we pin the uid of the user to 1000.
```

```nix
        uid = 1000;
```

> We specify a service that auto start firefox after login, which is easier than doing this in the test script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We specify a service that automatically starts Firefox after login, which is easier than doing this in the test script.
```

```nix
      environment.systemPackages = [
        (pkgs.makeAutostartItem {
          name = "firefox";
          package = pkgs.firefox;
        })
      ];
```
<!-- check again if this is best practice -->

> Because gnome doesn't allow the evaluation of javascript to get information about open windows we need to override the gnome-shell startup service to start gnome-shell in unsafe mode:

Reviewer: Use original capitalization of software project names.
```suggestion
Since GNOME doesn't allow the evaluation of JavaScript to get information about open windows, we need to override the GNOME Shell startup service to start `gnome-shell` in unsafe mode:
```

```nix
      systemd.user.services = {
        "org.gnome.Shell@wayland" = {
          serviceConfig = {
            ExecStart = [

>               # Clear the list before overriding it.

Reviewer: IIRC
```suggestion
              # Clear the list before overriding it. This is a quirk of systemd.
```

              ""
              # Eval API is now internal so Shell needs to run in unsafe mode.
              "${pkgs.gnome.gnome-shell}/bin/gnome-shell --unsafe-mode"
            ];
          };
        };
```

> The test script utilizes the gnome dbus interface to get a list of open wayland windows. we wait until firefox appear to be started and make a screenshot that will be found in the result folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test script utilizes the GNOME DBus interface to get a list of open Wayland windows.
We wait until Firefox appears to be started and make a screenshot that will be found in the result folder.
```

```{code-block}
    testScript = {nodes, ...}: let
      user = nodes.machine.config.users.users.alice;
      bus = "DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/${toString user.uid}/bus";
      gdbus = "${bus} gdbus";
      su = command: "su - ${user.name} -c '${command}'";
      gseval = "call --session -d org.gnome.Shell -o /org/gnome/Shell -m org.gnome.Shell.Eval";
      wmClass = su "${gdbus} ${gseval} global.display.focus_window.wm_class";
    in ''
      machine.wait_until_succeeds("${wmClass} | grep -q 'firefox'")
      machine.sleep(20)
      machine.screenshot("screen")
    '';

> ```

Reviewer: An optional explanation (hidden in `<details><summary>Detailed explanation</summary> ... </details>`) of exactly *what the hell is happening* in this script would be an order.

      environment.systemPackages = [
        (pkgs.makeAutostartItem {
          name = "firefox";
          package = pkgs.firefox;
        })
      ];

      systemd.user.services = {
        "org.gnome.Shell@wayland" = {
          serviceConfig = {
            ExecStart = [
              # Clear the list before overriding it.
              ""
              # Eval API is now internal so Shell needs to run in unsafe mode.
              "${pkgs.gnome.gnome-shell}/bin/gnome-shell --unsafe-mode"
            ];
          };
        };
      };
    };

    testScript = {nodes, ...}: let
      user = nodes.machine.config.users.users.alice;
      #uid = toString user.uid;
      bus = "DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/${toString user.uid}/bus";
      gdbus = "${bus} gdbus";
      su = command: "su - ${user.name} -c '${command}'";
      gseval = "call --session -d org.gnome.Shell -o /org/gnome/Shell -m org.gnome.Shell.Eval";
      wmClass = su "${gdbus} ${gseval} global.display.focus_window.wm_class";
    in ''
      machine.wait_until_succeeds("${wmClass} | grep -q 'firefox'")
      machine.sleep(20)
      machine.screenshot("screen")
    '';
  }

> ```

Reviewer: This may benefit from splitting configuration and test into separate files. I don't expect anyone to seriously look at this beast.

### Tests that need multiple virtual machines

> Tests can utilize multiple virtual machines.

Reviewer: This is *so* important.

```suggestion
Tests can utilize multiple virtual machines.

```

As an example we use the use-case of a REST interface to a Postgres database.
Because some of the needed packages of this example are broken in 22.05 release this example uses a specific revision of nixpkgs.

> This example shows the value of pinning a test to a specific revision of `nixpkgs`.

Reviewer: This should be a `:::{note}` right before the example. It is not well-placed in the introduction to what will come next, and really is a stupid implementation detail we'd rather not care about.

        after = [ "postgresql.service" ];
        script =
          let
            configuration = pkgs.writeText "tutorial.conf" ''
                db-uri = "postgres://${username}:${password}@localhost:${toString config.services.postgresql.port}/${database}"
                db-schema = "${schema}"
                db-anon-role = "${username}"
            '';
          in "${pkgs.haskellPackages.postgrest}/bin/postgrest ${configuration}";
        serviceConfig.User = username;
      };
    };

    client = {
      imports = [ sharedModule ];
    };
  };

  # Disable linting for simpler debugging of the testScript
  skipLint = true;

  testScript = ''
    import json
    import sys

    start_all()

    server.wait_for_open_port(${toString postgrestPort})

    expected = [
        {"id": 1, "done": False, "task": "finish tutorial 0", "due": None},
        {"id": 2, "done": False, "task": "pat self on back", "due": None},
    ]

    actual = json.loads(
        client.succeed(
            "${pkgs.curl}/bin/curl http://server:${toString postgrestPort}/${table}"
        )
    )

    assert expected == actual, "table query returns expected content"
  '';
})

> ```

Reviewer: This absolutely needs an in-depth explanation, and should probably be multiple files. I know this is from the previous version, and it doesn't make it less scary.

> Unlike the previous example the virtual machines need an expressive name for this example we choose `client` and `server`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the previous example, the virtual machines need an expressive name to distinguish them.
For this example we choose `client` and `server`.
```

To set up all machines and execute the test script:

> ```shell-session
> $ nix-build postgrest.nix
> ```
> 
> You'll notice an error message if something goes wrong.
> 
> In case the tests succeed, you should see at the end:
> 
> ```shell-session
> ...
> test script finished in 10.96s
> cleaning up
> killing client (pid 10)
> killing server (pid 22)
> (0.00 seconds)
> /nix/store/bx7z3imvxxpwkkza10vb23czhw7873w2-vm-test-run-unnamed
> ```

Reviewer: Make sure the example works.

````suggestion
```shell-session
nix-build postgrest.nix
```

    ...
    test script finished in 10.96s
    cleaning up
    killing client (pid 10)
    killing server (pid 22)
    (0.00 seconds)
    /nix/store/bx7z3imvxxpwkkza10vb23czhw7873w2-vm-test-run-unnamed
```
````

> to run the test run:
> ```shell-session
> $ nix-build postgrest.nix
> ```
> [^additionaltests]

Reviewer: This seems to be an artifact?
```suggestion
```
